MSC3939: Account locking (#3939)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/3939-account-locking.md

There are legitimate cases where server administrators might want the ability to
temporarily lock users out of their account. For example, server administrators
might require users to go through a regular, out-of-bounds verification check in
order to keep using their account, and temporarily lock a user out of their
account if they do not complete this check in time.

At the time of writing this proposal, the only option for a server administrator
to prevent a user from accessing their account is to deactivate it. However,
this is a pretty destructive operation. Ideally, a locked account could be
unlocked without any visible impact on the account itself (joined rooms,
associated 3PIDs, etc).

## Proposal

A new `M_USER_LOCKED` is introduced, which is communicated to clients in `403 Forbidden` HTTP responses.

When an account is locked:

* homeservers must respond to any authenticated request from the user with
  `M_USER_LOCKED`, _except_ for requests to `/logout` and `/logout/all`.
* homeservers must not automatically invalidate existing access tokens for the
  user.
* clients should keep data that has already been locally persisted, unless the
  user manually logs out.

> 

Reviewer: We would like to hide locked users from the user directory, should it be added to this MSC or left as an implementation detail ?

If left as an implementation detail I am thinking of providing an option in synapse to tweak the behavior.

Author: My personal opinion is that this sounds like an implementation detail to me.

Reviewer 2: This indeed sounds like an implementation detail, though per the [spec](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.8/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3user_directorysearch) the server would need to reveal locked users who share a room with the user doing the search - an MSC is required to change this.

Reviewer 3: Impl detail sounds fine. You could argue it would be non-spec compliant but by the same token you could argue that not returning deactivated users is too.

Reviewer 4: Are implementation details explicitly mentioned here in the spec so that it is clear to the reader and the topic is not regularly discussed because it is not clear?

Reviewer 2: There should be some text in the MSC to note that something has been declared an implementation detail, yes.

Reviewer 5: If it is to be left as an implementation detail, then the MSC can say something like "Servers may omit locked accounts from the user directory."

Reviewer 2: (added to text)

When an account is unlocked, clients and the homeserver can start interacting
again as if nothing happened, similarly to when a client recovers after loss of
connection.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 6: For moderation, another alternative to account deactivation is [shadow bans](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.39/admin_api/user_admin_api.html#shadow-banning-users) to essentially lock the person out from sending any events although the user gets no feedback on purpose in this case.

Not a good candidate for other non-moderation cases through.

Author: Yeah, if I remember correctly the initial reason that triggered this work was trying to make Synapse's [account validity](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/modules/account_validity_callbacks.html) feature not use an [out-of-spec error code](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/07d7cbfe69c239a7ffe5668c1166799370eef0d6/synapse/api/errors.py#L73).

A use case could be that an organisation might require its members to verify their activity within the org by clicking a link sent via email every few months. In which case it is desirable to visibly lock the user out of their account if they don't click the link before a set grace period ends, but it isn't to deactivate their account because they might e.g. be on holiday and should be able to recover it by clicking on said link when they come back.

I won't update the MSC with this clarification (since I'm abandoning it, see https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3939#issuecomment-1618816306), but if you think that would be helpful to add it in (which I would tend to agree with) feel free!

Reviewer 2: brief mention has been added

# MSC3939: Account locking

There are legitimate cases where server administrators might want the ability to
temporarily lock users out of their account. For example, server administrators
might require users to go through a regular, out-of-bounds verification check in
order to keep using their account, and temporarily lock a user out of their
account if they do not complete this check in time.

At the time of writing this proposal, the only option for a server administrator

> to prevent a user from accessing their account is to deactivate it. However,

Author: I can be wrong, but I believe this only works for password auth?

> to prevent a user from accessing their account is to deactivate it. However,

Reviewer 4: Yes, of course.

> this is a pretty destructive operation. Ideally, a locked account could be

Reviewer 2: introduction clarified, I think

unlocked without any visible impact on the account itself (joined rooms,
associated 3PIDs, etc).

## Proposal

A new `M_USER_LOCKED` is introduced, which is communicated to clients in

> `401 Unauthorized` HTTP responses with `soft_logout` set to `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`401 Unauthorized` HTTP responses with [`soft_logout` set to `true`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.8/client-server-api/#soft-logout).
```

Reviewer 2: applied manually

> `401 Unauthorized` HTTP responses with `soft_logout` set to `true`.

Reviewer 3: Sorry, I don't think I really understand this paragraph. Firstly, "A new `M_USER_LOCKED` error code" presumably? And are you saying that this code will be used as the error code in any such response? Also, wouldn't it be 403 responses? A 401 would be asking the user to reauthenticate, which isn't what we want.

Reviewer 3: Oh, I see the explanation in the alternatives section. A bit here about why 401 is used would probably be beneficial.

Reviewer 2: moved up

When an account is locked:

* homeservers must respond to any authenticated request from the user with
  `M_USER_LOCKED`, _except_ for requests to `/logout` and `/logout/all`.
* homeservers must not automatically invalidate existing access tokens for the
  user.

> * clients should keep data that has already been locally persisted, unless the

Reviewer 3: I would phrase this in terms of what a client does when it gets that error code which might be clearer, as only the server implicitly knows that the account is locked.

Reviewer 2: I believe I have clarified this

  user manually logs out.

When an account is unlocked, clients and the homeserver can start interacting
again as if nothing happened, similarly to when a client recovers after loss of
connection.

Using 401 return code allows the user to be aware of the fact that something wrong is

> happening, since the app will be logged out.

Reviewer 3: I'm left unclear as to whether the user is expected to have to log back in again after their account is unlocked. This would say yes, but the above paragraph implies that don't? It would be good to clarify, probably in the sectin about the client's behaviour (I don't think they'd need to log back in, necessarily?)

Reviewer 2: I believe I have clarified this

Using `soft_logout` allows to keep everything encryption related in the client until
the user logs again (after being unlocked).

## Alternatives

This proposal could be merged with
[MSC3823](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3823), which
describes a similar concept coming from a content moderation perspective.
However, locking and suspending an account are semantically different enough
that the author of this proposal thinks that it makes sense for those two cases
to be described differently in the API.

Another option for merging this proposal with MSC3823 would be adding a
`suspended` boolean property and an optional `href` string property (which would
be required if `suspended` is `true`) to errors bearing the `M_USER_LOCKED`
error code. Opinions are welcome on whether this is a better solution than using
two distincts error codes.

Another option is to use 403 responses instead of 401 and `soft_logout`. We choose this
so that existing apps provide some feedback to the user without explicit support for

> this MSC.

Reviewer 3: It does mean that, assuming we believe 403 is the 'right' option, we'd have to make a further change to adjust it to this though? Also, wouldn't this be a bad UX because the user would try to log back in and not be able to? (Hopefully the client would show them the 'account locked' message once they tried to log in, but this is still rather too late). Honestly this feels to me like taking another shortcut that might get a solution faster but will add another paper cut and lead to a poorer experience.

Reviewer 2: (I've avoided changing this line to ensure this thread stays visible).

Not sure the new text is any more convincing, but I'm curious if thoughts have changed here (or could be changed after reading the new proposal text).

Reviewer 3: As far as I can see, the deal is:
403:
 * Legacy apps just stop working on account lock, appearing more or less as if the server is offline
 * More correct(?)
401:
 * Legacy app deletes the user's session data on account lock so they potentially lose encrypted messages
 * User tries to log back in and them hopefully works out what's happened
 * Suggests that the credential (ie. access token) is incorrect when it isn't.

Does that feel accurate? Seems like mentioning that the user's session data will get nuked by legacy apps on a 401 would at least be useful to mention?

Reviewer 2: Soft logout should prevent total destruction of session data, but some information would indeed be lost. 403 I don't think feels correct as it'd be more indicative of suspension (https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3823) than locking, at least as far as legacy apps are concerned.

I'll try to clarify this in the MSC (please feel free to open a new thread, as the line here will probably change)

## Proposal

When an account is locked, clients receive a `401 Unauthorized` error response
to most APIs with an `M_USER_LOCKED` error code and `soft_logout` set to `true`.
Excluded APIs are described below. We enable `soft_logout` to encourage clients
to make use of the [soft logout](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#soft-logout)
semantics: keep encryption state, but otherwise render the account unusable. 401
is used to support legacy clients by giving the user semantically meaningful
experience: they may need to try logging in again, and when they do they may get
a more useful error message about their account status.

Clients MAY prevent actually logging the user out until the error code or response
changes. This is to allow the client to emit a few more requests after receiving
the error, as may be the case with a very active `/sync` loop. Once the error code
changes (but remains a 401 otherwise, regardless of soft logout), the client
should proceed with the logout. Similarly, if the response changes from an error
to a successful response, the client can assume the account has been unlocked and

> return to normal operation without needing to get a new access token.

Reviewer 3: Sorry, I don't understand what this is trying to say. What/who is trying to log out that the client may be preventing them? 'Proceed with the logout' means call the logout endpoint? Delete the user's data from the device? How does the state change on the server when the logout API is called?

Reviewer 2: this is trying to say that the client doesn't need to delete anything, like a softer soft logout. Will try to clarify.

Reviewer 2: hmm, this ended up being a duplicate paragraph in practice. I've distributed the useful bits to other places in the text - please open new threads if the wording is still unclear.

# MSC3939: Account locking

Account locking is a common safety and security tool where server administrators
can prevent a user from usefully using their account. For example, too many failed
login attempts, escalation in moderation action, or out of band verification
needing to be completed.

Currently, Matrix only supports deactivating an account. This is a destructive
action which often leads to the account leaving all joined rooms, among other
details. With account locking, the effect of making the user unable to access
their account is achieved without destroying that same account - the account
can always be unlocked.

This proposal covers account locking, though leaves the specifics of use as an

> implementation detail. Self-serve locking APIs are additionally not provided.

Reviewer 7: This took me several goes to grok

```suggestion
implementation detail. APIs for administration of locking are also not provided.
```

semantics: keep encryption state, but otherwise render the account unusable. 401
is used to support legacy clients by giving the user a semantically meaningful
experience: they may need to try logging in again, and when they do they may get
a more useful error message about their account status, though their session data
may be deleted by the client if it doesn't recognize the error code. Soft logout
aims to prevent total destruction of this data, however.

Upon receiving the `M_USER_LOCKED` error, clients SHOULD retain session information
including encryption state and inform the user that their account has been locked.
Details about *why* the user's account is locked are not formally described by
this proposal, though future MSCs which cover informing users about actions taken
against their account should have such details. Clients may wish to make use of
[server contact discovery](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#getwell-knownmatrixsupport)
in the meantime.

Clients SHOULD hide the normal UI from the user when informing them that their
account is locked, preventing general use of the account.

> Clients SHOULD continue to `/sync` and make other API calls to more quickly detect

Reviewer 5: How should the server behave when `/sync` is called?  If it returns immediately with the `401 Unauthorized`, and then the client immediately retries, it sounds like this would cause unnecessary traffic.  So presumably the server should wait until the timeout is reached before sending the `401`, unless the account gets unlocked before?  Though I guess it should send the `401` immediately the first time that `/sync` gets called after the account gets locked, so that the user is notified immediately?

Reviewer 8: I also found this bit weird since it says `/sync` *and* make other API calls. I assumed it means the client should make *any* API calls periodically, which could be `/sync` or `/account/whoami` or whatever.

If /sync is getting a new kind of 401 long polling, it definitely needs to be documented explicitly. If not, the section should probably be clarified that clients should just periodically call any API (but not in a tight loop like /sync)

Reviewer 2: I believe the missing language is that clients should back off for some time, as if they were rate limited. I don't think `/sync` neccessarily gets a new long poll mechanism here, but clients do need to do something to discover when an account is no longer locked. Element Web for example will back off on `/sync` errors, then loop a `/versions`, `/push_rules/`, `/sync` call order - if all of these endpoints return success codes, the client resumes normal operation.

The bit about "other API calls" is mostly to acknowledge that clients do not linearly send requests. An account may be locked in the middle of a user scrolling through backlog: there's `/messages`, `/send/m.receipt`, and `/sync` all happening at that point - the client should recognize that an error on any of them is assumed to be an error on all of them.

(if this is clearer, happy to translate it to the MSC)

Reviewer 2: addressed by https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3939#discussion_r1576886975

> when the lock has been lifted. If unlocked, the APIs will either return a different

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
when the lock has been lifted.  However, clients should rate-limit their requests. If unlocked, the APIs will either return a different
```

to address the thread above.

error code or a normal 200 OK/successful response. For example, `/sync` will return
to working as though nothing ever happened. If the error code changes to
`M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN`, the client should delete local session data as it normally
would when seeing the error code (and use soft logout as it normally would). This
is typically expected if the server admin logged the user out or the user logged
themselves out.

Locked accounts are still permitted to access the following API endpoints:

* [`POST /logout`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3logout)
* [`POST /logout/all`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3logoutall)

> Servers SHOULD NOT invalidate an account's access tokens in case the account becomes

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When a user's account is locked, servers SHOULD NOT invalidate an account's access tokens in case the account becomes
```

Having this sentence right after the bit about the logout endpoints makes it initially sound like servers shouldn't invalidate the access tokens when the logout endpoints are called, which is clearly not what is intended.
